to this day everybody focuses on Obesity
but obesity is not our problem if you
are in the lower one-third of strength
you have a 50% greater risk of dying
from nearly anything you have to
prioritize skeletal muscle what is that
this is the organ of longevity the only
organ system that you have voluntary
control over and there's only two ways
to stimulate skeletal muscle number one
Dr Gabrielle lion is a pioneer of muscle
science and the board certified
physician for athletes CEOs and Navy
Seals transforming the way we think
about muscle and how it can prevent
disease optim your body and completely
reshape how we age when it comes down to
your health it shouldn't be about how
you look it should be about how you
perform and there's known replacement
for resistance training and skeletal
muscle mass but only 6 to 8% of people
are meeting the resistance training
guidelines and the majority of
individuals are sedentary can you
describe to me what my life will look
like as a 61-year-old if I just sit in
this chair and do zero resistance
training for the next 30 years are you
ready you're 30 so right now Alzheimer's
disease and cardiovascular disease is
likely throughout your lifespan your
testosterone is probably low and your
sperm quality isn't as good as it could
have been so there's a link between my
fertility for men and women and my
muscle mass yes and then you're probably
going to be extremely winded walking
upstairs likely have obesity and sleep
apnea which means you're deteriorating
your brain and metabolic health and it's
all going to come down to choices our
present choices will determine our
outcomes so run me through your day cuz
I'm just going to copy whatever you do
great okay so what time do you wake up
what do you eat how long do you train
for are you calorie counting at this
point and what time is that last meal
typically
well question if you could sit at a
table with any four guests from the d a
CEO who would you choose here's a
challenge for the entire D CEO Community
if we hit 10 million subscribers by the
end of
2024 you will get to pick four guests
for your dream conversation and you can
make it weird or you can make it
wonderful and here is the best part
3,000 of you that subscribe will be
invited to join this conversation live
in person and for free subscribe now and
let's make this happen
together Dr Gabrielle
lion what is it that you do for
people I believe that I take away any
physical
restrictions and I certainly feel
privileged to take care of people that
change the world and when you say
physical restrictions give me some
flavor and color at what you know when
we think about the way in which humans
are sometimes they have low energy or
hormonal problems or gastrointestinal
problems you name it but those things
limit their ability to show up in the
world no matter how high performing or
how high achieving the common
denominator is their health and nobody
will ever go higher than their own
personal health it is the great
equalizer that and age and who did you
do it for give me a flavor of the people
you've worked with and the walks of life
they come from and what they do yes well
I've been a physician for 20 years and
there has been a number of patients and
kinds from geriatrics I did my
fellowship in geriatrics in aging and
when I finished that I started a coner
medical practice and I take care of
right now many of the guests who have
been on this podcast like um Evie pomus
and um a woman named Dan Patrick I don't
know if you know who that is she's a
race car driver
extraordinary and many tier one
operators like Navy Seals and
CEOs individuals that are out there that
are Mavericks really trying to change
the world and one of the things that
happens is individuals have this
capacity to push through any way that
they are feeling but the cost of that is
very
predictable and in my clinical practice
and part of what I believe that I was
put on this Earth to do is to help
people who help change the world so when
people come to you and you practice what
is it that they typically say what is it
the the most typical thing that they're
searching for and how do they articulate
that that is a wonderful question and
one of the things that they say is they
feel like they know they could feel
better that they could have more energy
better sleep you name it that they just
have this sense that something is still
on the table and we figure it out
we go through whether it's Environmental
Testing again hormones blood work a lot
of my patients have been deployed
overseas they come back they've been to
Mayo Clinic and all these other places
but they still don't get better and I
think wellness and health is very
holistic in the approach and I am
telling you once that is taken care of
these people are already making such an
impact but then they can go on because
they're not encumbered by inflammation
or not feeling well or let's say their
body composition is off let's say they
are someone who's always been a high
achiever and high performer and I don't
know they hit midlife and all of a
sudden things have changed it's my job
to help remove any of those
physiological restrictions so that they
can do what they do best and not worry
about the other things is it complicated
what you propose are your Solutions
complicated or are they
simple another great question it really
depends on what it is that we're looking
at the most
complicated of all of it is actually not
the physical it is definitely the
mental because you have to understand
that I
think a physician needs to be very good
at being able to recognize patterns and
diagnose patterns of disease but in
effect effective physician is able to
recognize patterns of
people because people are
extraordinarily predictable in their
nature I'm going to give you an example
you're looking at me there's an eyebrow
rais I had I'll tell you about one one
patient in particular and every year he
put on this massive event this massive
event in Vegas made millions of dollars
did well and every year I would wait for
the phone
call I'm feeling depressed
I just did so well I don't know what's
wrong with me I'm off my diet I don't
work out I all the Litany of things and
what he failed to recognize was as high
as he was going was as low as he was
going to fall and I see that with all my
type A individuals I wouldn't say that
there's a particular demographic of
patient whether they're SEALS or CEOs or
moms but it is definitely a mindset and
the individuals that I see they want the
best out of
themselves and at the other side of that
and I'm sure you know many of these high
performers they drive really hard but
they fail to recognize that as high as
they go after a book launch and maybe
you experienced this with your own book
you worked so hard you launched this
book into the world or maybe your first
massively successful episode which now
may be a little bit less because they're
all massively successful but right after
after that there is this dip and you
don't go back to a baseline it's not
like any other Tuesday it's a very big
high and a very big low and one has to
recognize that nothing will take someone
off any kind of Health and Wellness
Journey faster than those Lowes and is
that psychology or is that physiology I
is that my mind and my thoughts or is
that my biology and what's going on in
my head my perspective is that it's
physiology there is an internal
recognition or interpretation of the
stress but from my perspective there is
a physiological response and from what I
can tell and what I believe and what
I've seen is this dopamine drive it's
and of course this is a simplistic way
of talking about it but there's this
drive and they are so excited they're
amped up they've spent a ton of time in
preparation getting ready to do this
thing and they've deployed so much
importance on this one thing that when
that thing is over they're constantly
grasping for the next thing and we all
talk about burnout as this thing and
burnout happens that way and it's this
drive of more and once you can
recalibrate that drive and understand
that you have to have a very neutral
mindset going into things then people
are able to mitigate and manage their
own physiology mhm the the mindset
component is probably the most important
because I could give you the perfect
plan but if you are unable to to execute
that then it doesn't matter there must
be so many millions of people that
listen to my podcast that have heard all
of this advice in terms of how to better
themselves their cognition their
performance in various aspects and they
still haven't put any of it into motion
for whatever reason and you must
experience that too in your practice
where someone comes to you you tell them
what to do
but the how part is sort of contingent
on them having some kind of motivation
or discipline or whatever it is um from
my perspective it's worthiness
interesting it's when it comes down to
the fundamentals it's does this person
feel worthy of having the health and
wellness that they yes that they desire
and if a person doesn't feel worthy of
doing it or worthy of having it they
will sabotage
themselves once I explained this
predictable human nature to this patient
of
mine the game plan was he was going to
be neutral he didn't go too high he
didn't go too low and there's very
specific strategies that we can talk
about the way in which one maintains
neutrality but at the end of the day he
felt worthy of feeling really
good we covered intermittent reward we
covered not celebrating every win um
conscious uh conscious turning it on and
turning it off very controlled Dynamic
expression of what the goal was turning
it on turning it off right I see this my
husband is a former Navy SEAL I see this
in this group of individuals all the
time they're able to have controlled
intensity but the other individuals that
never seem to get better so the
individuals listening to this the one
thing that they would have to really
settle in on is do they feel worthy and
if someone does not address at the core
that they feel worthy of executing the
information that you and so many others
are providing they will never make the
change discipline motivation discipline
is easy it's not difficult there are
constructs in our mind that may tell us
it's easier to over sleep or not go to
the gym but at the end of the day
discipline can be practiced it's not
hard motivation is another thing but who
Waits on motivation to execute
nobody I mean you shouldn't because that
is a perishable feeling
but understanding that this worthiness
has to be addressed before people are
going to make any kind of change becomes
critical and typically it comes back to
what they tell themselves on a daily
basis how they interpret their
environment maybe they experience
everything as
stressful and don't feel worthy of
taking action to get out of that
distraction of stress so if I came to
you and I exhibited worthy worthlessness
I didn't think I was worth much in my
career and you could start to pick up on
it maybe I was I don't know I was
carrying myself in the certain way my
body language the way I was talking
about myself subtly I was putting myself
down um and maybe maybe there's other
things going on and you go do not this
guy doesn't think he's worthy where
would you start with me well first of
all I would let you come to that
conclusion okay the first thing that I
would do is I would say Stephen how are
you sleeping are you really sleeping
well and I would guess maybe you're not
maybe you're staying up late your mind
is always going you're really thinking
about things I would ask you how you're
sleeping how are you eating how is your
digestion what are you being exposed to
and then I would give you a handful of
tasks I would tell you we got to get
your blood work done we have to do a
sleep study you know we have to address
what's going on
gastrointestinally are you reacting to
certain foods and maybe you'll get that
done or maybe you won't but if you came
to me and said I am not feeling the best
version of myself I would say are you
ready to figure out what this is and
then I give you lip service and I say
yes I am doctor yeah and then we would
have to have a real conversation because
there's this interesting kind of
segue CEOs and again a large portion of
my population are CEOs is they will the
predictable course is they're too busy
to get it done it's not a
worthiness aspect but it is they're too
busy but again health is the great
equalizer
there will come a point that is very
predictable that they will call me um
again many of your guests have called me
saying hey Gee I'm not feeling well my
stomach is really bothering me I feel
like it's sour I'm not sleeping well you
name it and I go okay well did you knock
out these five tests that we had to get
done and they might say
no 6 months they will come to a point
where they will have to get it done once
they get those tests done now we start
seeing the worthiness
aspect now we have evidence of what
needs to
change and those individuals that
execute on those change typically will
understand the importance of the long
game right if you want to be as
successful as you can be a Maverick and
make a mark and do all of your potential
leave all of your potential on the table
the only way that you are going to be
able to do that is to liberate your
Health you have to you cannot push past
how you are feeling this worthiness
thing is really interesting to me um
because I do I can relate when I think
about certain people in my life that
have been unable to make the change
despite having all the resources the
time but it's hard to know if they have
the time because sometimes people use
that as an excuse well Stephen if people
don't have time for health and wellness
how are they going to have time for
sickness
H that's so much more timec
consuming but they just people don't
assume that they're going to get sick
getting sick is a surprise but is it I
mean it is it appears to be for most
people they just we all kind of live in
you think about how we live and the
decisions we make in the short term it's
evident that we don't believe we're
going to either die or get sick which is
a huge failure of our
culture um you know when I think about
longevity and I think about aging and I
think about the individuals that fall
and break their hip and end up in a
hospital bed because they haven't
trained or haven't taken care of this
this body which we only get one there is
a predictable end point it is happening
and we spend all this time trying
to increase this concept of anti-aging
we are aging aging is not a
disease how we do it is largely up to us
and if we can condense this future
version of ourselves to now and
understand not just the
physical attributes but also the mental
attributes that will require us to move
forward then people would begin to take
action can you tell when you meet
someone if they're going to make the
changes that you describe and that you
suggest very quickly yes
and what are the whole they're like
archetypes okay you know there is the
CEO archetype which I'm telling you they
are going to put it off for good 3 to
six months and eventually they will get
it done and once they get it done they
will stay on top of it they will get it
done because they recognize that their
physicality is the common denominator
because they are in it to be the best
version of themselves and then there are
other people that have gone to 13 other
Physicians and have lost hope in the
system and those individuals or maybe
they had a physician that said something
to them and it really scarred them those
individuals will be very resistant to
execution but once you earn their trust
they'll get the job done MH and then
there are individuals that really
struggle with worthiness that part of
them wants to evolve maybe they had an
old trauma maybe they had a physical
trauma or something that
really really shook them and the trauma
can be like a little tea trauma a big
tea trauma yeah it could be a small
thing their dad left they yeah you know
or it could be something bigger more
horrific absolutely and one of the
things that we see is there is this
interpretation of stress and people
think stress is all fight or flight and
we should try to de-stress and take a
hot bubble bath but we actually evolved
to manage and mitigate stress as humans
we're much stronger than we recognize
and there are additional stress
responses that we don't talk about and
we know from work out of Stamford and uh
other individuals Labs that what you
believe about an experience is how your
physiology will show up about that
experience so for example there was a
hotel caretaker study so you could call
it um a maid study where they looked at
two groups of housekeepers
one group they said what you're doing is
amazing you are definitely getting
physical activity here's all the
positives and the other one the other
group they just went about their day and
you know maybe they were told that they
should do physical activity or not but
at the end of the the housekeeper study
those individuals that were told that
what they were doing was in part like
physical activity showed low and that
they didn't need to do anymore but what
they were doing was amazing those
individuals had lower blood pressure
they had better glucose regulation
better insulin they had lost a little
bit of weight and it was all their
interpretation of the environment they
were in we tell people that the world is
so stressful and that everything your
internal response is fight ORF flight
but we have one word to describe a
million different things and we call
that stress I'll give you an example a
pet dies or you have um a white sofa and
your kids just spilled coffee all over
it or you break up with a loved one or
there's a death of a spouse we have one
word and we call that stress that's it
we have one word to define a million
different
things we live in an environment where
people talk about I'm so stressed and
this is stressful but that we don't have
any other word in the English language
to globally Define
something maybe that word Could Be Love
but not really not in the way that we
talk about stress so people think about
stress is fight ORF flight that severely
limits both their physiology and their
capacity the other two stress responses
which are much more enhancing is tend
and befriend which releases oxytocin
which makes people more capable it makes
them more connected this is the their
stress yet they go to help other people
immediately that's also a stress
response or the courage response the
courage response we see that with a lot
of military operators a moment of stress
they're immediately taking action I'll
give you an
example if both myself and my husband
were getting ready to jump out of a
plane I would be terrified and he would
be excited to do it he would be a
listening
courage we're both in the same
experience but he is having one of
courage and I am having one of fight ORF
flight when we both jump out of the
airplane plane who do you think is going
to be more capable to get up and do the
next thing your husband that's right I
would still be in this fear response
probably take
me at least a couple hours to
recalibrate if not a day or a
week whereas he has a response which is
courageous and can be cultivated his
capacity to then not only experience new
things but continue
on will mitigate much of the
physiological damage that would happen
from these other fight ORF flight
responses and what I would say to that
is fear is a normal
response but having courage is a choice
you must have you must have met people
in your practice that walk in and
they've got some kind of trauma which
has led to their state of sort of
unworthiness how does one do anything
about that when you can't go back and
write the wrongs of their past and you
know I don't know how much you want to
dig into their psychology and become
their their therapist to try and unpack
some of that stuff but if these things
are so deeply hardwired into them in
some way you know some Early Childhood
trauma that's stopping them feeling
worthy which is stopping them having
quote unquote motivation to change do
you just give up on the person never
what could you do and can you give me a
specific example when that's happened
well the first thing that I would tell
you is
I would turn to a coach I have an
extraordinary coach and his name is Jim
kachula he is he has worked with myself
helped make that book possible as as
well as uh other individuals whom you
know and that requires someone who is
really willing to go in and dissect that
I have to know where physiology ends and
psychology begins MH I will also say I
trained in Psychiatry for two years
and the mind was of course the most
fascinating part for me at first that's
actually what brought me into my work
with the military that I do
today I will tell you that if I were to
think of a very
particular patient I will she had a lot
of trouble
sleeping and this woman we later found
out we did everything we did a sleep
test didn't have sleep apnea was
extremely
unsettled really um had hormonal
problems put her on hormone replacement
still really struggled with
sleep did all of the things that one
would need to do like a dark room I know
you had Andy Galpin on he does talks
about sleep and has absolute rest and
you know looked at her environment did
everything at the end of the day it
turns out that the reason she wasn't
sleeping is cuz she had been assaulted
and she had had
forgotten but every time she would go to
bed her heart rate would spike um and it
was something that that wasn't my domain
but I knew that she had to
really deconstruct that if she was ever
going to move
forward part of it is figuring out
where there are weaknesses and
vulnerabilities within a person because
we think about the way that Healthcare
is set up right is that it's used see a
doctor for 15 minutes maybe it's a half
an hour intake and then you're on to the
next but a real therapeutic relationship
is exactly that it is a real
relationship it is not transactional if
you are a physician you know being a
physician it used to be a very honorable
thing and they were on the council for
people it
was you know they were your right hand
and we have really changed from that you
know I'm talking about maybe in the
1800s it was a very honorable privileged
position and I still believe it is that
and so part of moving people to from
where they are to a level of wholeness
requires being a teammate do you try and
motivate people all the time do you
think that's part of your your remit as
a physician to motivate them part of
my job as a physician is seeing what
they are capable of MH is seeing what
their true potential is and to push them
yeah do some do sometimes people need a
bit more pain before they yes and I mean
this speaks to What mo what's going on
with like motivation and discipline
because if you need a little bit more
fear and a little bit more pain then it
kind of illuminates what this what's
actually going on with people's
motivation you can almost put it into a
formula where like the strength of their
their why is at one side of the that
equation and then there's some some
other factors in the equation but it
seems to start with the strength of
their why and pain more fear a bad
result seems to amplify their why to the
point they go okay [__] it I'm going to
do something about this now yes and I
think that there is a potential to not
wait till that happens because is very
predictable you know and if someone is
listening to this or thinking about it
you don't need to have to wait to get to
that point because that point of
breakdown is going to come and you might
as well get ahead of it you can only
push so far your original question is do
do I think that part of my job is to
motivate people yes do I think it is
also to see their weaknesses and
vulnerabilities being a physician and
and taking care of some of the most
extraordinary people in the world you
get to see behind the
scenes and the people that are doing
extraordinary
things their characteristics are
actually not that
different they are often times extremely
motivated by service
they are it's not a selfservice it's an
other service and when you can tap in to
say Hey listen in order for you to
really be able to expand your reach grow
this Legacy change the world then we
have to fall back on the things that you
are completely ignoring and again uh
vulnerability is hard for people but
exposing that and letting them come to
those
conclusions then
you see a full evolution of a person you
how I mean how many patients do you
think you've seen over the last thousand
thousands why did you do what you
do I find the greatest joy aside from my
kids and my husband and my family being
able to be of service why well I would
say that I'm always I've always been
wired to be this way I have always been
wired to take care of people and I would
say right now when I think
about my patients like danah or um some
of the other entrepreneurs that you've
had on I believe that no one is going to
be able to get the job done better than
me and is going to care
more and it feels really good to be able
to be there for people are you a happy
person yes for the most part I would say
I have a very positive disposition I do
when are the seasons of unhappy in your
life I think during training was very
hard for me during my fellowship saw a
lot of death and that was really
hard work a lot of hours see a lot of
death that was hard you still remember
that oh yeah changed you yeah that's why
I got into social
media I had just finished my fellowship
um 200 15 and I hadn't been on social
media or anything and I had just been
you know you go through and you see
patient after patient and you know none
of them are getting out of the hospital
they're all going to die
there can you imagine so you're seeing
30 30 patients a
day this one is on pain meds you know
this one is going to die this one is 18
and she's going to die and she's
planning her wedding but she is um she's
planning a wedding she was never going
to be able to she had um cystic fibrosis
there was nothing that they could do for
her and she was never going to have a
chance to get married or do anything and
she was planning her wedding she wanted
to pretend like she was going to be able
to get married picked her dress to have
an experience she was never going to
have and
um you know during that time
I you know as I was coming out of
Fellowship in
2015 we seeing all this BS on social
media these people talking about you
know this cleanse and this fake diet and
like all of this stuff and the
information was so
bad
that I felt responsible that if I had
the privilege to have you know had a
17-year education and have seen all of
this stuff and then to not say anything
that I knew was going to make a
difference or be impactful for People's
Health and Wellness the end
comes the decisions you make become
critical but where it really becomes
critical is in the beginning the
children and then at the
end and if you start hearing all of this
Narrative of how we you know um should
reduce our dietary protein and do all
these other things and just destroy our
skeletal muscle based on this input that
we're getting the information was so
wrong that I felt a responsibility to
say something and if I didn't I would be
contributing to the same
problem but it was very hard it was very
hard does that come at a cost the caring
yes yes yes it does nobody has ever
asked me that yes it
does it um and this might not be the
best trait but I am willing to be there
at midnight at 1:00 if someone needs
something I got it and yes does that
come at a cost to myself it does and my
family it does I am very careful about
protecting the time but
um yeah it's is there an em cost to this
as well because if I if I was every day
I was waking up and I was being involved
with other people's problems in such a
way other people's challenges their
sickness their illness their their death
I I don't know if I'd need some
strategies to to cope with that like
getting invested in somebody and then
seeing a bad outcome and that sort of
feeling of like what could I have done
or you know well luckily
um my patients are no longer knock on
wood life or
we are dealing with things like
um hey you live in a toxic mold
environment or you have lime um we can
move past this or hey you have covid and
you're in Washington let me get some Pax
liid sent to you or um maybe this person
is going through a bad breakup or their
thyroid is off it's light in that way I
mean sometimes I have to send people to
the hospital but it's no longer carrying
for end of life but now it is positive
and it is
challenging but again I've been a
physician for 20 years you build up
capacity I was thinking the other day
about some of the like mind because a
good idea that infiltrates your mind can
change your life yeah because it's kind
of like corrective it like it's almost
like it goes in there like a vaccine and
it attacks a mind virus that you had
something that was holding you back some
kind of limiting belief about the nature
of life in your work what are those kind
of mind viruses those myths that people
carry with them that ultimately inhibit
their chance of becoming this optimal
performer that you want them to be
there's a handful of things and also we
have to recognize that we're talking
about two things physiology and
psychology from
a physiology from a physical perspective
there is a one of the things that is
extremely detrimental is this
comparison individuals that compare
themselves physically to other people
will stay hooked
in that typically is a comparison of
Youth as individuals mature in their
late 30s 40s I do see that dissipate but
if that doesn't dissipate they will
continue to hone in on this physical
Readiness and that allows for certainty
so think about this we all
see amazing athletes or people that are
incredible are incredible shape and your
ultimate question is what are the things
that limit whether it's a mind virus or
something limiting to allow somebody to
become the best version of themselves an
uninhibited version of themselves or
unencumbered from a physical standpoint
when an individual is solely focused on
the physicality mhm and that can be from
a looks perspective
that can be from you know my husband
always tells me stories about those guys
that go into SEAL training the first
guys to wash out this is what he tells
me were always the great athletes
because they had trained physically they
were capable of dealing with
certainty you throw a ball you know how
to do that they hadn't prepared
themselves for mental uncertainty or
fortitude and this circles back to this
so the individuals that are fully
focused on this external comparison it's
about looking good it's about being fit
it's about having more plastic surgery
less wrinkles whatever it is those
individuals are chasing a game that they
will never catch the perspective is
wrong we all get
older we all will at some point not be
as physically
capable as we are now you're in your how
old are you
31 getting up there you are 31 me
getting up there me I'm getting old no I
cannot talk um but there is this
physical capacity that if you were to
just say
Gabrielle let's just focus on the
physical then we know by the time you
are 50 and listen 50 is not a great
number because we I a ton of amazing fit
50y olds but when you are 80 if all you
did was look at that physicality by the
time you
were more mature
you would become and I don't want to say
more depressed but this if your world is
purely external there is an inevitable
decline in that and you know what I'm
talking about right time is against you
it's toen yeah you know your skin is
going to Sag whatever it is hopefully it
doesn't but those individuals that are
fully externally focused those
individuals really struggle with
aging and you will not focus on the
things that
matter and that is a virus that will
happen you will always be comparing
because it will bleed over to everything
how you manage your psychology will be
how you manage your
physiology so what should I be aiming at
what if I'm not going to be aiming at
the physical attributes and the
comparison what what kind of measure
should I apply to myself to understand
if I'm doing a good job you should focus
on physical Readiness but it shouldn't
be about how you look okay it should be
about how you perform when you think
about gaining physical Readiness it
should be about the acquisition of skill
the acquisition of strength I talk a lot
about muscle I believe skeletal muscle
is the organ of longevity you should be
focused on becoming physically strong
but the physical performance outcome how
you look is not the end point the idea
that you are training for Life able to
whether it is to run or to squat or to
Bene press or to get stronger in a
meaningful tactical way you should
continue to move that needle a lot of
people though they we were talking
before we started recording about how
people are driven by like short-term
incentives and it's quite insane for
someone to focus on a long-term
incentive in the face of like a
short-term incentive so if I if my
short-term incentive is for someone in
the office to think I'm hot or you know
to find a partner I'm going to be so
focused on getting that blow dry I'm
going to want that like facial and I'm
going to if I've got you know an hour of
free in a day I'm going to aim at the
facial the blow dry how can you convince
me that that's a bad idea versus aiming
it at I don't know building muscle or
becoming physically strong time is
finite and we are given time how we
spend our time will determine our
outcomes it will determine where we're
going how globally strong we become
because strength is clearly not physical
there is a level of global strength
which which means becoming masterful at
something for example you are masterful
at business at interviewing at learning
and thinking about people if you were
distracted and you could totally choose
a life of
distraction you could be distracted by
the external shiny objects perfectly
okay but that outcome if that becomes
regretful then that becomes
devastating you know um taking care of
people at the end of life you hear a lot
of
regrets and it wasn't that they wish
they had had another blow dry and I know
what you're saying is that how do we
think about later life if we can't
identify in the short term or take in
the short term what makes us happy right
we are thinking about I want this cake I
want this thing I want to buy this car
shout out to my husband no we are not
getting that
Defender but the shortterm term is very
limited and we live in very fast-paced
society that will tell us to embrace
that and to fight for that thing but it
only takes a moment of spending time
with the elderly or the Aging or people
that are wiser than us to look back and
say these are the moments that you can
fully develop yourself and again from a
physical standpoint should you focus on
physical Readiness absolutely you are 31
do you think it's going to be easier at
41 I hope
so we got to get you on a good program
um I'll call Lan later but you have to
do these things and you have to bring
back into perspective what is important
and what is valuable I'm thinking about
a particular friend of mine who I was
describing there with the blow dry thing
and and the like spray tan and the blow
dry they're they're you know approaching
40 they're looking for a partner
they are spending any free time they
have on the on the spray tan and the
blow dry listen I'm not not judging I'm
a case study and there's many people
like that and they're spending zero time
on physical strength don't go to a gym
Don't Go Near it don't do any exercise
and I'm just wondering you know how you
make a case to that individual that
actually to achieve the goal that they
want to achieve which might be to find a
partner actually it's the inverse it's
they should be doubling down on the
internal versus the sort of surface the
first thing that this person is
obviously driven by the external M and
you have to recognize that you cannot
have a strong physical body if you are
mentally weak because you will never
feel good about what you are doing you
will be distracted you will live a life
of distraction that will then rob you of
your
future and the case I would make to your
friend is these immediate distractions
and being a good friend would be telling
them this or allowing them to come to
that understanding when you say you
can't have a strong body unless you have
a strong mind how are you defining and
how do you define a strong
body you should be able to be physically
capable in whatever it is that you want
should you be able to do a pull-up
probably should you be able to do at
least 10 push-ups yes is that number
different for everybody yes if I asked
you to please run a mile could you do it
and do it well I think being and having
physical sovereign
and being able to be in control of your
body and to be strong and not require
someone to help you with things I mean
granted you probably couldn't lift a car
by yourself or a bed but but but this
becomes extremely important for our
aging population and for where we are
now what do I mean by this we are
becoming increasingly weak as a
society the majority of individuals are
moving towards
obesity children are becoming more and
more
obese are they strong are they as strong
as they could be from a physical
perspective I would say no and again you
can choose a marker of goals to hit
which I recommend that everyone does
whether it's squat deadlift you name it
run but you have to be able to have
accountability for your physicality if
you were going to be giving me goals to
hit right and I don't necessarily mean
like 10 reps whatever but just the types
of goals that I should be aiming at to
have a strong body what what are those
types of goals so you mentioned
squatting there you mentioned you know
maybe being able to pull myself up being
able to run are these the kind of goals
that you would give to me so say a 30 40
year old what kind of goals would you be
aiming at and are the goals different if
I'm 50 and 60 they are you should at a
minimum and I'll give you an example um
you should at a minimum be training 3
days a week with with weights doing
resistance training you've had many uh
you just had my friend Mike Israel on I
mean that guy he is jacked he could
probably lift you with one hand and me
with a pinky and he would be going all
over the place you should be training
your muscles from a strength and or
hypertrophy standpoint three days a week
okay so is that everyone yes everyone
regardless of age yes yes that part is
regardless of age three
listen could you get it done in two days
a week which is the recommendation the
current recommendation for activity is
150 minutes of moderate vigorous
activity and two days a week of
resistance training is that going to be
enough to keep you walking around yes is
that going to be enough to evolve your
body to manage and mitigate aging no it
is
not we have to call ourselves to a
higher standard 3 to four days a week
four you've added a day okay well I was
going to say three I was going easy on
you okay so three days a week you should
be doing and I only train I do
resistance training three days a week I
might throw a fourth day in there for
anyone that doesn't know what resistance
training is moving
um your body or a load against
um uh resistance so it would be for
example taking a weight and moving that
through space whether it is a squat or a
bench press these are all resistance
training moving against a resistance of
some load it could be body weight it
could be a Band 3 days a week everybody
I mean I I'm okay with two days a week
but in an Ideal World it should be three
days a week my recommendation is you
train for muscle hypertrophy which is
muscle growth 10 to 20 sets per muscle
group a week you can break musle groups
so I would say um you could do a upper
body lower body split you could do
what's that um a push pull like a bench
press or a a back row so back and um
chest you could do full body training
which was which I think is the best for
people compound movements like a squat
or a deadlift this is full body you
should be doing some kind of movement
but Stephen if someone said like my dad
before I came on this podcast he
FaceTime he lives in Ecuador and he was
doing resistance bands with bicep curls
mhm I'm okay with that if you want to do
that and that's how you're going to do
your upper body or your arms fine so it
could be chest back you know glutes legs
why should I be doing three days a week
what am I going to get out of that make
make the case to me number one you are
never going to regret being stronger
period end of story you need to be
physically strong skeletal muscle is the
organ of longevity it is not just about
get looking good in a bathing suit it
helps it's so great um your friend who
is getting her hair blown out and doing
all these other things put her in some
training and listen it's probably going
to be a
killer skeletal muscle is your primary
site for glucose metabolism fatty acid
metabolism it's your glucose snc if you
decide that you want to eat
carbohydrates and you care about
metabolic Health you have to have
skeletal
muscle you're not convinced yet are you
I'm listening okay well you're you're
kind of like maybe convinced that you
think skeletal muscle is important but
if I told you that this is your body
armor that if you are in the top
onethird of
strength compared to if you are in the
lower oneir of strength those that are
in the lower oneir for strength
have a 50% greater risk of dying from
nearly
anything if you are in the lower
onethird of strength you have a roughly
50% chance of dying from all cause
mortality but I'm getting old Dr Lon I
I'm I'm 58 yeah um when people get old
they put on weight they lose muscle we
get weaker we get frailer this is what
this is just the nature of life don't
fight life the first thing that I would
say is congratulations making it to 58
well done sir and then I would say that
is totally not true that is not what we
see in the literature anyone at any time
can get stronger and put on
muscle anyone at any time can get
stronger and put on muscle do you know
what it is yeah part of the reason why I
think people don't believe that is
because we look at our parents and our
parents looked at our parents and our
parent their parents looked at their
parents and our parents are like a case
study of what we what we should expect
they set the expectation and when a lot
of us look up at our our parents we see
people that are maybe have had a little
bit of weight added um maybe our dads
have a bit of a pot belly because of all
the beer they've been drinking or
whatever yeah maybe they walk a little
bit slower they can't run they're out of
breath so we kind of just assume that
that is normal and that's what we should
expect of ourselves and I think I I did
that I looked at my dad who um he's on a
bit of a health Journey at the moment
but before he was on that Health journey
I did kind of I think at some point in
my mind I conceded maybe that's just
what like genetics do they just give you
a pot belly they slow you down you lose
your muscle you get weak yeah the funny
thing about humans is when we hear and
see things over and over again we
believe them to be true whether they are
or they're not humans are funny
creatures in that they experience
repetition as truth mhm what do I mean
by that I say Stephen this is stressful
this is stressful our fight ORF flight
is the only way and then you go you know
what Gabrielle fight or flight is the
only way that's all I've ever heard we
see our parents age and we believe that
that's just the way that it is but I can
show you many individuals that are aging
well and strong both of my parents are
incredibly
fit is that genetic maybe I picked my
parents well but what I will say is that
the
traditional framework of Aging is in
part the way that it is because we have
divorce the idea of skeletal
muscle from Health the Bros got it right
you need to be jacked you need to be tan
and if you're not jacked and tan or if
you are resistance training is only
[Music]
for the
Bros nothing could be further from the
truth and because of of that thought
process we have divorced skeletal muscle
Health from overall health and wellness
and Longevity if I as a trained
geriatrician were to say and by the way
I did seven years of nutritional science
training as well if I were to tell you
what is the one most important thing to
take you through life do you know what I
would say probably muscle that's
right hands down across the board the
weaker you are the less muscle mass you
have the greater chances you will die so
in terms of cardio is do you think
muscle mass is more important than
cardiovascular exercise as you
age you're putting me in the hot seat
and I would say both we know are
important
but again both are very
important but there is no replacement
for resistance training and
muscle mass there is none you will not
get the same stimulus by doing
cardiovascular activity and you know you
mentioned your parents or your dad you
see and we see collectively our aging
population shrink right they become
thinner and scrawnier and more
sarcopenic we see this happen there is a
transition of fiber types there's
different fiber types and they
transition from from type two fiber
types to type one what is that type two
are the big bulky
fibers that you train for hypertrophy
strength and hypertrophy for there is a
transition that happens if you are not
constantly fertilizing these muscles
through strength and hypertrophy
training through resistance exercise if
an individual is solely focused on
cardiovascular activity this will not
maintain in a meaningful way these type
to your bigger bulky muscle
fibers when you lose skeletal muscle
mass you also see a change in metabolic
Health Muscle is the primary site for
glucose
disposal it is primary site for fatty
acid
oxidation when you lose skeletal muscle
you see an increase in blood sugar
insulin type 2
diabetes skeletal muscle is what allows
us to buffer the foods that we eat so if
I'm eating lots of sugar and carbs for
example and I've got lots of muscle then
the the sugar in the carb is going to be
basically stored in my muscle but if I
don't have any muscle then where is it
going to go
exactly liver fat you are going to
become increasingly unhealthy unless you
are training so if I if I have more
muscle does that mean I can eat more
carbs and there' be less of a
consequence like likely yes especially
if you are training and you have healthy
skeletal
muscle um skeletal muscle can be
marbled you can get an increase in
myosteatosis which is fat infiltration
in skeletal
muscle in order for skeletal musle there
is no such thing as a healthy sedentary
person you will look in the literature
and you will see people say oh healthy
sedentary there is no such thing as a
healthy sedentary person what do I mean
by that there was some wonderful work
out of Yale they looked at
18-year-old college students that were
considered lean and
healthy put them in a a time frame of
inactivity and they become they became
insulin resistant they had skeletal
muscle insulin
resistance even though there were no
outward signs of obesity or
fat if you are an
active you will not be turning over your
glass glycogen stores which is the
stored form of
carbohydrates you will begin to build up
byproducts your skeletal muscle will be
increasingly more unhealthy over time
you cannot get out of doing resistance
type exercises and to be clear you do
not have to be doing a one rep max you
could simply start by body weight
resistance training it could be yoga it
could be bands but at some point you
will have to stimulate that tissue in a
meaningful way to age well how many
people are meeting the activity
guidelines at the moment and how many
people
aren't
roughly 6 to 8% are meeting the
resistance training guidelines 6 to 8%
yes sir just if you were to look at
resistance training guidelines now 50%
of Americans don't even work
out over 70 roughly 70 5% do not meet
both
recommendations the majority of
individuals are sedentary
individuals it's interesting because
people would then say well you know
these stats are all bad but our life
expectancy seems to have gone up you
know year-over year for well I mean I
think it's had a little bit of a blip
recently because of Co but it's
typically going up into the right our
life expectancy so we must be doing
something right is it about life
expectancy or is it about quality
could we keep someone alive on bed
rest
probably would one say that that would
be a good quality of life you cannot
have a high quality life without high
quality
muscle more specifically people care
about
autonomy can you imagine if you couldn't
physically get your groceries
you are young We Are Young we take for
granted the physical capacity that one
has that is a gift it is a skill that
must be
continuously pushed or the trajectory of
Aging is exactly what we
see people get to a point where they can
no longer lift their
suitcase on an airplane overhead do you
see that yeah yeah people struggle to
get their bag on the Belt to go through
security is that normal that is not
normal how do we know this are there
other sort of societies where they just
age better than us um and they're you
know they've got 60y olds that are being
able to lift their bags above their head
I mean I can tell you
from my father's community in
Ecuador my dad is
74 if something is a 3our
walk or less he'll walk it I definitely
don't like to go visit him as you can
imagine it's a lot of
walking they are extremely physically
active they seem to age well and I think
that you will find pockets of
individuals
who do things that are very Physically
Active throughout their lifespan which
will allow them to maintain a muscle
span which is the time in which they
have quality skeletal muscle
I will also say we control our
environment everything can be easy for
us if we choose you can take the
escalator you can take the elevator you
can get in the car you can do all of
these things inoculating yourself
against muscle aging takes effort but it
has to be
done each time someone has a choice to
either do it physically themselves or to
take the easy way each time an
individual can continues to take the
easy way the predictable decline will
it's like putting another coin in the
bank but maybe that bank is being spent
on something worthless that's exactly
what
happens what are the misconceptions
people have about um weight loss you've
touched on it a little bit but if I've
come to you and I say listen Dr L I'm
going to be honest with you I just want
to lose some of this belly fat I just
want to be um lean and I want to be
beautiful um should I get
liposuction um what diet should I go on
what would you say to me first thing
that we have to figure out is your
muscle mass I mean this is a little
complicated because I would of course
ask them how we got to where we were
right H how do we get here are you
emotionally eating are
you I don't know not sleeping or what
are the are you drinking too much what
are you doing what are we up against
what are the actual tactical behaviors
that we are up against M and then I
would say let's go we got to build some
muscle we have to work on some body
recomposition and really the two ways
that we're going to start are the two
basic and that is diet and exercise so
no lipo section I mean Stephen if you
wanted to I do know a great plastic
surgeon okay but no
unnecessary and again this goes back to
this hyperfixation on body fat when the
conversation should not be
about obesity drugs or body fat the
conversation needs to swing
back to not about making people less
obese but to making them have more
healthy skeletal
muscle what's the link though so how is
having more skeletal muscle going to
okay gluc the glucose is going to be
stored in it so that means less glucose
is going to be stored in my belly fat my
metabolism is going to be better you
said as well so your your ability to
store glucose yeah will be from you know
obviously store it in your liver but
skeletal muscles the primary site for
glucose disposal am I going to be less
hungry now that is a great question and
there is observational data and I say
this very hesitantly because it hasn't
been published yet but I believe that we
are going to begin to see that skeletal
muscle has a role in appetite regulation
because because of receptors on skeletal
muscle you will not find anything out
there yet but I do believe that there is
observational data from some of my
colleagues that are doing research that
we will see that there is some appetite
connection with skeletal muscle well I
burn more calories when I'm working out
if I have more muscles you will what
about a
zmek should I should I consider a little
bit of a zek on top it depends on how
long you've been struggling
okay I
am I do recognize that these
are very complex issues whether it's OIC
or mongero gp1s or
Gip these
drugs these drugs are here to stay I do
think they play a role I know you had Dr
Tina [__] I am fully in alignment with
much of what she said there is an
absolute role for this
I will also say that why is it that
within that conversation of body
composition why is it that it is so much
more socially acceptable to give someone
a
medication to decrease
obesity yet the idea of giving someone a
medication or an anabolic like
testosterone or a testosterone
derivative would be
shocking to
people I can administer a drug to make
an individual less obese but there is an
incredible amount of stigma if I wanted
to administer a drug to allow someone to
have stronger bigger muscles what kind
of drugs would you administer to give
them stronger bigger muscles
testosterone would be my first one how
much testosterone there depends Michael
he was uh on the podcast previously he
told me that taking testosterone and
steroid roids made him angry and gave
him really vicious thoughts dark
thoughts but Michael is a professional
bodybuilder and we know that there is
health and wellness and that those that
operate at the Pinnacle of their sport
that does not mean that those
individuals are training in a healthy
amount right there is a cost of doing
business at the peak of anyone's career
in anything and from a phys IAL
standpoint
certainly that
utilization would be different than
someone coming to say hey I need to work
on my body
composition the big Point here is the
dichotomy and conversation between the
two it's fully
skewed in the way that it is much more
acceptable to give a medication to
address obesity and much less acceptable
to give a medication to address skeleton
muscle mass and I personally believe
that that conversation needs to shift a
lot of people say that zmek causes
muscle loss as well it doesn't really I
have not seen a direct mechanism of
action that
OIC affects skeletal muscle in a
negative way in fact I have seen the
contrary there is evidence to suggest
that OIC and individuals like these
drugs in this class can actually support
skeletal muscle
Health the reason individuals are losing
muscle mass on these
drugs are because they are not
training and managing their dietary
protein there's only two ways to
stimulate skeletal muscle and that is
through resistance training and dietary
protein you cannot outm
medicate poor Behavior oh but but
because they're on a appetite
suppressant like a zmek that means
they're probably just not getting their
protein we utilize these drugs in my
medical practice all the time we track
body composition all the time it is
routine we track muscle
mass we do not see a decrease in
skeletal muscle mass when individuals
are dosing protein appropriately and
training does a zmek and these that
category of drugs will people have a
certain psychological mindset
benefit that's a wonderful question and
here is what I would say as a physician
who is in practice removing physical
obstacles are critical and individuals
can spend time obsessing about their
body um just really it can infiltrate
their thoughts it takes away from their
capacity to show up in life
to be present because they're worried
about their
weight and can you imagine if someone
was struggling with that for a decade or
two or three now we have a new class of
drugs that will take away in part a
desire to binge eat or take away in part
a desire to even potentially drink
alcohol what it allows for is physical
Freedom do I think that that comes with
a cost
of not doing the hard thing and and
doing those kinds of
behaviors it does it does make things
easier however there is utility in that
yeah because if someone suggested it to
me I'd say the first thing I'd say is Dr
Li what's the cost because nothing's
free in life so and if I don't know what
the cost is that's even more scary I'd
rather be able to balance the trade-off
but not many people are giving many cost
with a zmek at the moment well number
one you don't need it right you would
not be someone who needs o zmek or mno
or Zep bound you you just want to be
someone who needs
that um but I do actually believe that
this in combination with hormone
replacement therapy is going to be the
way of the future for longevity what's
the cost I cannot tell
you what the cost is and here's why
because people will say it slows down
gastric
emptying um yes that's exactly what it
is supposed to do will that have a
meaningful outcome not necessarily these
drugs are not new drugs this class of
drug is not a new drug it has been
around for last 20 years I know at least
for the last 10 there must be a cost
though the cost is when you go off of
this yeah you likely have and again this
is just my perspective is once you
titrate off then normal hunger cues
should return and if you do not have
appropriate strategies in place an
individual will then begin to struggle
potentially regain the weight have you
seen this I haven't we take people off
these medications all the
time and they don't rebound they do not
rebound they do not
rebound but again we do very
intensive lifestyle interventions we
also
figure out why people got into the place
or the hole where they are starting
why right you say there's no free lunch
and maybe the no free lunch is you have
to address old
trauma maybe one will really have to
explore the way in which they cope right
cannot cope with emotional e like they
you cannot do these things if you want
to maintain your body composition as you
age you have to be accountable for these
things did diets work do you ever put
someone on a
diet if they're overc consuming calories
yeah and what does that look like for us
I mean we've been doing this for a very
long time we the first thing that we
decide is dietary protein which is
unfortunately seems to be the most
controversial macronutrient which by the
way you looked at me crazy and you're
absolutely right why would any
macronutrient be controversial but
dietary protein again it wasn't like
this until the influx of social
media and what do I mean by that dietary
protein it just seems as if there's
always a reason why people are trying to
remove it from the diet which seems
somewhat ridiculous and
counterintuitive the first thing that we
do is we recognize that dietary protein
is what the foundation of any solid
nutrition plan should be built on and
that is 7 to one gram per pound ideal
body weight
if you eat High nutrient-dense foods
like animal products you could probably
go to the lower end at 7 if you are
someone who does not eat any kind of
animal product you're probably going to
be closer to 1 gram per pound ideal body
weight of um whatever that source of
protein is but protein is what is going
to maintain hunger you know uh dietary
protein does cause an increase in glp
glp1 in the body and people will talk
about that although it's only meal to
Meal which is so you know you have these
glp1 Agonist which improve satiation so
like a zenek is a GP one Agonist which
makes you less hungry yes dietary
protein in part works on that same kind
of mechanism also releases
glp which makes me less hungry yes okay
improve your improve your satiation okay
dietary protein we know can help
regulate hunger can
also maintain blood sugar right if you
have carbohydrates in in check not a
very efficient way but your body can
generate glucose from dietary protein a
lot of people associate protein with
like bodybuilders and stuff like that I
know it's such a mistake it's a mistake
because as individuals age they need
double the the minimum recommendation to
prevent a deficiency the current
recommendation is8 gram per kilogram or
37 gram per pound if someone was 115 lb
their dietary protein recommendation
would be 45 gr that would be the minimum
to prevent a deficiency as individuals
age they require more dietary protein
because skeletal muscle becomes what we
call anabolically resistant it means it
becomes less efficient at utilizing
dietary protein if you were to eat the
way you did maybe in your teens and 20s
body at that time is extremely anabolic
I mean you look like you're pretty fit
have you always been pretty fit no
pretty fit in terms of what though I've
not always had as as much muscle mass as
I have now but I've always been um fit
as in playing sports and stuff my whole
life and has it been easy to put on
muscle generally I'd say yes when I was
younger it was it felt a bit more
difficult but I just think I had had
things wrong I don't think I was
consuming enough calories but as I've as
I got to sort of 25 26 27 it became a
little bit more straightforward which is
amazing your body is highly anabolic you
are now consuming calories protein
you're able to put on skeletal muscle
that tissue is very anabolic it's
sensitive to the foods that you're
eating to the stimulus you're providing
as you age that tissue becomes more
resistant I've Got Friends that tell me
they can't put on muscle easily how old
are they one of them's 27 and the other
one I think is about 29 okay and they're
men and they've told me that no matter
what they do they just can't put muscle
on well first things that I would do is
ask them what they're doing are they are
they consuming enough calories do they
have enough protein where do you think
they're going wrong when I said that the
F you want me to be honest the first
thing that I thought was I am seeing a
huge increase in low testosterone levels
in younger individuals interesting and
um I know it's just me and you and not
the millions of people that watch your
show but um the medical answer would be
they should look at their diet and
training and sleep but what I am seeing
clinically is that young young men have
increasingly low levels of testosterone
and how does that link to them not being
able to put on muscle they
are um less anabolic than they should be
what does anabolic mean building they
are less capable of building okay if if
I this is a problematic question um is
there any way to tell if someone has low
testosterone just by kind of looking at
them some of my colleagues might
disagree with this I would say you could
potentially guess but do they have less
um hair on their legs do they have less
muscle mass do they have um what would
look like potentially more estrogen in a
male you know you're putting me on the
spot here right yeah but all those
things I was thinking of my one
particular person I think all those
things are true so maybe it is low
testosterone my next question becomes is
there a way that they can stimulate
their testosterone without having
needles stuck into them absolutely I
mean the first thing is you have to look
at lifestyle what is their diet you do
need nutrients if they are not sleeping
and they are um taking potentially uh
recreational drugs this can all affect
testosterone it could be it can affect
sleep it can affect a number of things
the first thing that I would do is are
these guys sleeping are they eating
well eating well being the protein we
talked about yeah are they eating a diet
that is fully processed are they
training training in and of itself isn't
going to generate testosterone per se
but it would increase the receptors
increase the skeletal muscle receptors
increase those Androgen receptors um the
other thing that I would say and this
may be a little bit outside the box but
what are they being exposed to we do a
lot of heavy metal testing uh we see we
do see a lot of exposures those things
can affect fertility
whether it's lead or Mercury those kind
of things absolutely and where do these
things come from these heavy
metals I mean we're drinking out of a
metal cup I know I know this is
stainless steel I don't think that this
gets into the water um they could
certainly get it from aluminum cans they
could get it from eating a lot of
seafood they could have
exposures um maybe they're training on
weapons maybe not you could be getting
lead you're in great shape than thank
you what' you eat diet and protein and I
eat a lot of carbs I train a lot so run
me through your day what time did you
wake up between 5:30 and 6:00 my husband
wakes up at 4:
mhm so and then problem and then what
you do I get
up um see if the kids are asleep or
awake usually one is in the bed two is
in bed and then I get ready to go
train Get Up 3 days a week I I head over
to meet my coach shout out to Carlos
Mana he's the man and we hit it hard and
I'm usually 5 minutes late every single
time because in the morning one or both
children will decide if they're going to
come with me or not I include my kids in
my training how old are they three and
five oh damn you're getting them
training at 3 and five I
am my 5-year-old is in Jiu-Jitsu they
have their own kettle bell sets um
because people and children they don't
care what you say they care what you
do so sometimes they decide to come with
me sometimes they don't um and I train
fasted wait I didn't tell you I
caffeinate a lot a lot I am drinking
coffee now I may be someone who is tired
I drinking water or coffee how long did
you train for an hour and you only do
three times a
week I do three times times a week of
lifting okay I try to train as hard as I
possibly
can by that second day I'm tired it
would take a lot for me to do some kind
of major lifting I'm in the middle of
rehab the next day so I'll train Mondays
uh Wednesdays and Fridays Tuesdays
Thursdays will be some kind of light
cardio maybe I'll do 20 minutes maybe
it'll be intense whatever I'm feeling
I'm very active during the day sometimes
I wear a weighted vest
I take calls walking I move a lot my
friends joke that I am someone who never
sits still period end of story you can
see me now I'm moving all over the place
I have high energy expenditure my first
meal of the day will either be a shake
it might be 30 to 50 grams of a whey
protein shake uh typically I might even
have collagen in my coffee collagen um
in coffee doesn't necessarily stimulate
muscle but I use it for Hair Skin and
Nails it's an inkle me protein has a
protein score of zero I just wanted to
clarify so am I training FCD yes uh
mostly FCD might be shot of collagen 30
to 50 grams at that first meal I might
have some kind of carbohydrate but
usually um running around got to get the
kids to school or whatever it is my my
next meal might be some lean beef I'll
definitely have carbs I'll have either
rice or potato and some kind of greens
and that will be another you know if I
were to think about how much protein I'm
a tiny person um maybe 110 lbs I might
have 12 grams of protein a
day and then the last meal is also
between 30 and 50 gram of protein and
probably close to 50 grams of carbs and
what what time is that last meal
typically if you can help it around 7:00
I eat it with the
family nothing crazy I'm very
consistent I think it's important that
one meal or one workout doesn't take you
off
track I don't really think twice about
it I know what I have to eat food is not
um
complicated it's
effective I don't drink alcohol I don't
like the way it tastes I don't really
have a sweet tooth is that the only
reason you don't drink alcohol because
of the taste did you did you drink
alcohol before no you've never drank
alcohol no tastes terrible I'm sure
you've had it tastes like rubbing I mean
tastes terrible maybe I'm
lucky but also think
that you know can be toxic for the brain
but I choose not to have it because I do
think it tastes terrible every single
time you eat you have an opportunity to
improve your health and that's why I
love Zoe because Zoe helps me to make
the smartest food choices for me and my
body and as you guys will know by now
Zoe is a sponsor of this podcast and I'm
an investor in the company and if you
haven't tried Zoe I highly recommend you
do because Zoe combines My Health Data
with Zoe's World Class class science and
using those two things Zoe guides me to
Better Health every single time I make a
food choice and eat which means that I
have more energy better sleep better
mood and I'm less hungry and the most
important thing is Zoe actually works
it's backed by their recent clinical
trial something called the method study
which is the gold standard of scientific
research I started Zoe just over a year
ago now and I've been able to track my
progress week after week so I can learn
how to be even smarter the following
week and if you haven't joined Zoe yet
I'm giving you 10% off when you join Zoe
now just use the code ce10 at checkout
are there small parts of your protocol
that people can imp Implement you talked
there about not sitting you know you
said weighted vest yeah um are there
anything else that we can do that might
help us build muscle mass without having
to go to the gym yes what are the key
things you think about there if you can
take a call walking or rocking you can
load up weight it is Extreme easy to do
and you can do it slowly whether you
start with you could start with
7bs I have a 5B weight vest I have a 7
PB weight vest 20 and then from there
you can load up weight so you can build
up over time um people should be doing
that it is effective and easy everyone
can do that people are taking calls you
don't have to do a zoom call why not get
on the phone get
moving human body will like to sit right
as opposed to be forced to move but you
become it's almost like a roote activity
if you are someone who is sedentary it
becomes easier to become sedentary and
stay
sedentary it requires friction to change
you can mitigate some of that friction
by incorporating movement into your life
for example walking with a weighted vest
easy training with your kids people will
say I don't have time I'm so busy pick
up your kids after school we instead of
go and play video
games we do a push-up challenge or a
dance party in our have you ever heard
of Texas holdom the Poke game no the
dance have you ever seen this uh Beyonce
um made an amazing song called Texas
holdom and I thought she was talking
about poker she might be but there is a
line dance associated with that there
are a million fun ways to do something
we just have become accustomed to doing
less and we'll dance we'll do whatever
push-ups physical challenges playing
outside get the Nerf guns whatever it is
easy I mean it couldn't get easier than
that what do you think a good goal is to
have what kind of goal because it was i'
said this before but there's a time in
my life where my goals were very like
superficial um and they were like
anchored to a a date what are the best
kind of goals that we should set
ourselves as it relates relates to our
health I don't think we should set goals
no goals I think we should set standards
okay when you set a goal you can either
reach that goal or not but if you set a
standard then you will always keep your
standard and that standard will allow
you to reach a goal but the standard
won't change for example the standard is
you wake up and you set whatever that is
you train every day for me I train three
days a week um depending on how intense
that training was on Saturday I might do
a fourth day of training and on Sunday I
forgot to tell you this we do a group
workout my standard is physical activity
has defined moments and that is my
standard even if I'm traveling I know
exactly what that's going to be before I
get to the
hotel that is a standard of physical
activity I don't have to think about a
goal I don't have to have a goal of am I
going to hit that or not because I know
that those are things that I won't fall
short of
my standard is my nutrition plan I have
between 110 to 120 gram of protein I
have between 110 to 120 grams of carbs I
know what that looks like that is my
standard I don't deviate from that and
what are you struggling with as it
relates to your own
advice um sleep you're struggling with
sleep yeah is that because of the two
little kids or is it is because I have
to make a choice am I going to spend
time uninterrupted and undivided Ed with
them or am I going to do
work and my choice is I spend time with
them and then when they go to sleep I
work another two to three
hours and I should probably do a better
job and know that eventually everything
is going to get done but I set
standards do you find it difficult you
know because people always talk about um
not being able to have everything at
once this is what a lot of women have
said to me there were there was a time
where we were sold this dream that you
could have everything you can you can I
think so do you you must see a lot of
excuses in people I do I do because it's
hard to face the truth and what's the
truth what is the truth the truth is are
you doing this or are you not doing this
because of some kind of internal Choice
there has to be some truth telling and
sometimes that truth is uncomfortable
any you can get the job done there might
be things that um you have to
sacrifice but the job the the thing that
you want the outcome that you want the
standard that you set it can be
done it can be done it's you tell
yourself you can't do it I mean I have a
three and a
5-year-old do you know what kind of
chaos ensues at my
house you should come over and I
guarantee you you will hold off having
any kind of children for at least 5
years but nothing is perfect it can't
ever everything cannot be curated do I
still get my training in do I still get
my nutrition in am I anything special I
am not but my discipline is I am very
disciplined have you always been yes a
lot of people aren't and they haven't
ever been it's much more difficult to
not be
disciplined the reason I am disciplined
is to be able to manage my life how do I
get you a discipline you execute you
don't overthink it there's nothing to
think about what do you want I want to
be like you no what do you want where
are you falling short I want to be like
you you would not be nearly as
successful if you were undisciplined you
have to be disciplined I'm just trying
to embody the audience I'm just trying
to I'm trying to think through all the
[__] that people tell themselves and
we all tell ourselves [__] in
various aspects of our life if we're not
telling ourselves [__] as it relates
to like exercise it's something else
it's our relationship
and we and so many people struggle with
personal responsibility because if I was
to post if you were to post or I was to
post anything on my story that you just
said in the last sort of five minutes
they would be very offended yeah and
there' be well not every B there's a
small group of like so are they going to
edit this out so come oh no don't don't
send crazy people after me no we will
but um it's like the water Bouy gang and
the water Bouy gang you could say
anything and they say yeah but what
about yeah but what about and I
understand some people have they have
legitimate exceptions the truth is it is
very difficult to do what I do I run
three different businesses I take care
of some of the most incredible humans on
the
planet I have my own podcast I'm writing
two more books and I don't have
full-time help I'm a
mom the one thing I don't find is I
don't find excuses I figure out ways to
get it done because if it matters you
find ways to get it
done you know
if I were to
say and this is an extreme example but
let's
say I said to someone
who I'll just make this up loved
cupcakes I said if you eat another
cupcake then something catastrophic is
going to happen to your dog do you think
that they would ever touch another
cupcake no not in a second just like
that so the consequence is just not
meaningful enough
when you find a meaningful consequence
and you understand the consequence of
your actions in that moment it becomes
easy and this goes to what we were
saying about the discipline and the why
part of that equation you you refer to
it there as consequence like why does
this matter to you is the central part
of the equation and deep in your head
somewhere there's you're so clear on why
this matters yeah because you've you've
seen the research you've studied it
you've seen the the consequence of I've
seen the end result yeah you SE I've
seen end result at the end of the day
today we are
all health and age and death these
things nobody's getting out of them like
nobody so if I follow your protocols for
the next 30
Years yeah then I'd be 60 years old I'd
be 61 years old can you describe to me
what you think my life will look like as
a 61 year old I can versus if I just sit
in this chair and eat processed foods
and do zero assistance training for the
next 30 Years can you describe the two
different Stevens we'll call it we'll
call one sedentary Steve and we'll call
one um Dr Lion Steve
okay let's start with sedentary Steve
mhm I will say you're 30 so right now
you're
sedentary Alzheimer's disease is likely
beginning cardiovascular disease is
likely beginning right now at 30 that's
right remember these diseases that we
believe are diseases of
Aging are at their core and at their
root in part due to the health of
skeletal muscle the only organ system
that you have direct voluntary control
over that's it I cannot say Stephen I
want your heart to beat at 45 beats per
minute
go I cannot not control you might be
able to control your respiration but you
can't physically contract your diaphragm
go ahead contract
it okay maybe it's a
muscle skeletal muscle is the only organ
system that you have voluntary control
over that's it now if you decide to not
hear what I am saying then if you are
someone who has a genetic propensity
maybe you have I don't know uh when you
overeat you get high triglycerides or
you um choose not to
exercise we will start to deteriorate
your brain because Contracting skeletal
muscle is an endocrine organ not only
does exercise increased blood flow to
your brain um I just wrote a narrative
review with a colleague of mine um
Louisa Nia amazing
we looked at the influence of resistance
training and brain function I cannot
restore your brain but I'd love to be
able to prevent from the uh
connections to become weaker and weaker
and weaker
so you decide not to exercise I can do
nothing for your
brain
eventually you might
forget I don't know your neighbor's name
your kids's name
your
um anything what you did any meaningful
memory if we don't address your brain
now then the potential outcome is clear
right 2third of Alzheimer's um the
majority of dementia is Alzheimer's
dementia which plays a role
in uh metabolic regulation type three
diabetes of the brain if your skeletal
muscle is unhealthy you are likely
having now not only skeletal muscle
insulin resistance but brain insulin
resistance no such thing you
cannot be sedentary and be healthy so
that will begin now the other thing is
your cardiovascular
activity can't help can't help you there
not getting increase in blood flow
you're not um moving your cardiovascular
health the way that it should your lung
capacity your cardiovascular capacity
you're probably going to be extremely
winded walking upstairs it might take so
much effort for you to get up you might
not even be able to
fully stand up and sit down from your
chair multiple times you might struggle
with
that if I said Stephen I need you to go
to grab something out of the car for me
you would probably say oh man hey Doc um
that's going to take a lot of effort I I
I'm not sure I'm not sure I could even
grab that I don't know 15 pound grocery
bag you um likely have central
obesity probably have sleep apnea which
means you're further deteriorating both
your brain and your metabolic health I
would just throw in there you haven't
trained your entire life your
testosterone is probably low and maybe
throughout your lifespan who knows maybe
you have challenges with fertility
because your sperm quality isn't as good
as it could have been if you were
training and eating well are you
convinced yet so there's a there's a
link between my fertility for men and
women and my muscle mass there is um a
link
between exercise training metabolic
health and definitely
fertility I think we are going to see
more and more literature come out on
this muscle mass
infertility as um by the time you're 60
will definitely have more is there a
link between polycystic ovary syndrome
and muscle mass you talk about I think
in chapter two I do there is insulin
insulin resistance when you think about
skeletal muscle and insulin resistance
skeletal muscle makes up 40% of your
body weight or so depending for me it
might be less for you it might be more
when skeletal muscle becomes insulin
resistant again which means insulin is a
uh peptide hormone that is released from
the
pancreas you require insulin to move
glucose out of the bloodstream into
cells when you you exercise you do not
require insulin to move blood glucose
out of the bloodstream into skeletal
muscle
tissue it can be insulin
independent polycystic ovarian syndrome
is
multifactorial there is a component of
polycystic ovarian syndrome that is
related to skeletal muscle insulin
resistance once an individual manages
their skeletal muscle mass again there's
a various number of reasons as to why
someone would have it but in part
addressing skeletal muscle mass and
skeletal muscle insulin resistance can
help resolve polycystic ovarian syndrome
in certain cases I was reading on the
subject of sort of um PCOS and fertility
I was reading a study by Earth which was
um done at Harvard that found that men
who reported to frequently lift heavy
weights and objects at work had a 46%
higher sperm concentration and a 44%
higher total sperm count compared to
those with less physical jobs so you're
telling me if I want to up my sperm
count and have a baby and health and
health I should start lifting some
weights yes I was thinking about the 61y
old guy that listens to Dr Lion's
protocols but also let's say you didn't
we didn't talk about what would happen
if you listened yeah which is what I'm
saying so the guy that listened so the
61-year-old Steve bartett that listens
to your protocols holy cow the guy's a
beast he's now taking over the world
because does he have a sixpack of course
he does really at 61 yes is it possible
yes what's the healthiest oldest person
you've ever seen my dad really oh my
gosh he's 74 he could put on a little
more muscle okay his testosterone is
like 800 he's not any hormone
replacement he has been following what
I've been telling him unfortunate for
him because I'm his daughter he's been
listening to this message just sitting
here with you but we are talking about
over 10 years of talking about this of
seeing this with patients and
people he has amazing um hemoglobin A1c
fasting blood sugar cholesterol is in
check I mean he is strong he is
capable he's
74 what is the most important thing that
we haven't talked about Dr lion
I would say that nobody's getting out of
this
alive and it's all going to come down to
choices choices for how we execute our
present choices will determine our
outcomes and it is not difficult it's
not complex you have to prioritize
skeletal muscle this is the organ of
longevity with this physical framework
comes mental
strength and what's most important about
this isn't for us now like this is great
you can do it but it provides hope and
an example for our children that them
those people the little ones that is who
I am truly worried about because we have
normalized supersizing everything
including
ourselves we have more Electronics than
ever before we are more more
disconnected from people people will say
the internet has done a great job at
connecting face-to-face conversations
connection is
huge the most important is our youth and
how we raise them and the messages that
we give them because they are our
responsibility and if we cannot advocate
for our own health whatever those
limitations
are whether it's personal or worthy it
is our responsibility to do a much
better job so that we not tell them but
we show them the way forward and what's
the most important subject in your book
that we haven't
covered Forever Strong a new
science-based strategy for aging well
how to reboot your body to burn fat
fight heart disease reverse diabetes
stay sharp build muscle and Boost
energy I mean we talked about dietary
protein we talked about how that
potentially can be controversial
controversial for some people
um we discussed carb hydrates
carbohydrates are earned through
activity if someone is metabolically
unhealthy they have to understand that
potentially starting with 100 grams and
titrating up or down depending on their
activity level is
important how quickly do I lose
muscle you if you were in the ICU you
could lose 2% of your muscle mass in a
day G God what if you are in a highly
catabolic State on bed rest you will
lose muscle rapidly depending on your
age um within 7 days you could lose if
you're young and healthy 2 lbs of scelto
musas because I'm thinking if I go to
the gym today and I did my biceps and I
really smashed it how long before those
gains were
lost I would give you you'll lose
strength and then Mass um you will lose
it rapidly 7 Days of bed rest you will
lose
it and but it will return if you've been
well trained and it will return faster
the second time than it did the first
time right people talk about muscle
memory a lot that is a
interesting perspective yes if you are
well trained will it return Yes it also
depends on how long you have been
untrained for it also will depend on how
highly catabolic you are for example if
someone had cancer they're in a highly
catabolic State their body is breaking
down skeletal muscle mass will improve
their
survivability if someone goes on bed
rest you will lose muscle mass and
strength extremely
rapidly now will you able to impr uh re
return insulin sensitivity yes if you
decided to just
begin basic activities of living and not
exercising you will not be able to
recover that muscle getting out of the
hospital just doing basic things will
not be enough and now as you can imagine
that happens to
people I can imagine yeah yeah I go
through periods of my life where for
whatever reason I have to be a bit more
sedentary um things like filming TV
shows I filmed a show called Dragon's
Den where we basically sit in a room for
10 hours a day it's like Shark Tank here
and whenever I go through that season of
life it's very difficult I I I always
see this correlation between how much
activity I have I've been doing and how
much motivation I
have uh so if I've been sat down and not
been exercising for a while I find it
harder to find the motivation to go
again and it's this kind of vicious
downward spiral one thing that we didn't
talk about is how skeletal muscle mass
functions as an endocrine organ what's
an endocrine organ an endocrine organ is
something that produces hormones that
act systemically locally and um interor
there an interorgan connection when you
exercise based on intensity and duration
you release myocin myocin like
interlukin 6 or interlukin 15 these are
what people typically think is cyto
kindes that are released from
inflammatory cells or macrophases but
when you contract skeletal muscle in a
meaningful way based on the intensity
and duration you release myocin from
skeletal muscle that interface with your
brain they affect mood they affect
neurogenesis it also affects your liver
and your kidney there's this interorgan
cross talk you know we talked about
skeletal muscle about how important it
is from a metabolic perspective as a
body armor perspective but also as this
endocrine organ that can affect mood
because of the components that it's
releasing and that is fascinating it can
counterbalance inflammation based on the
activity
duration and intensity so that explains
why if I've not been moving I don't feel
as good in terms of motivation and um I
feel more fatigued when I've done less
exercise over a long period of time I
mean yes and it doesn't take much to
maintain what you have for example if
you could during those days do you have
to be so you're shooting for 10 hours
you don't have breaks we have lunch
break you should be training on that
lunch break I don't care how tired you
are I'm hungry then you should eat in 10
minutes and get to training it's a good
point and you're totally right push-ups
have a weighted vest do whatever you
have
to you will feel exponentially better
and also this is predictable so here is
an example you know it's it's coming
right you know that you'll be filming
this for 10 hours a day yeah what is
your strategy to execute in a way that
is effective and meaningful and that's
really it isn't it it's about forward
planning yeah you know it's coming it's
predictable it's also predictable how
you're going to feel afterwards and then
you are going to have to account for how
you feel and then you are going to have
to deal with the repercussions of now
not being motivated now having to
address your diet and now probably
feeling a little bit more down than you
would have we it's com it's one of the
big things I've just real realized as
you talking is I don't schedule my
workouts so my workouts are kind of this
residual residual beneficiary I either
get whatever time's left over in the day
which might mean last night it was super
late it was almost at midnight and then
today I've got a flight after this so
it's 10hour flight so it's like but I I
could quite easily I have the fortune
and privilege of just being able to ask
my assistant to change something so I
can say while you schedule everything
else also schedule an hour for me to
train but I think everyone could
probably do that I would I wonder how
many people schedule their workouts
everybody who is you show me your habits
and I will tell you how successful you
will be able to continue to be in the
long run you could probably look at
someone's calendar and figure out what
they're going to look like in 10 years
time I definitely
can but I will say that there's this
privilege of Youth and then there
becomes a Tipping
Point yes you should be scheduling those
things you can add
let's say you say to me Gabrielle I
don't have time to do it you are not you
could schedule three days a week you
know that we're filming all day you know
that you're doing these things that is a
non-negotiable because you're setting a
standard you set a standard for
everything in here and everything else
you do nothing is going to be more
critical for your impact than being able
to manage your health because again
there comes a point in time where um
it's a very
predictable Turning Point inflection
point if we get together again and I
don't know say it was 30 years from now
and I say to you how and you've been
successful over the next 30 Years
however you define that what happened
we've completely changed the
conversation we are no longer at nausey
I'm talking about obesity that is a side
component we are focused on physical and
mental strength we are focused on
understanding that it is a muscle
problem and a problem and a solution
that we can do something
about obesity is an afterthought and
personally my kids have done amazing and
they're happy and adjusted and can
withstand whatever whatever comes their
way and my husband will be picking up
his
socks if he stopped taking care of
himself he would never he's an he would
never but just say play out the scenario
yeah would you say something to him U
yes what would you say probably don't
want to put on camera but it would be
something totally
inappropriate and somewhat aggressive
but yes I would say something to him but
ultimately he has to be an example for
our kids it is his responsibility it's
not about him we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next not
knowing who they're going to be leaving
it for and the question that's been left
for you is Regret can occur due to
action taken or action not taken in
light of that what what is your biggest
meaningful regret and
why my biggest meaningful regret and
why I don't know if I have a
regret I I don't know if I have a regret
that I can think of because I think that
we are responsible for our choices what
if I put the word mistake in
there I mean the only thing that I could
think of is
I again this isn't a mistake or I don't
even know if I consider this meaningful
is that
um outcomes
unfold and instead of you know I was so
driven and I've been so driven by doing
good you know thinking like I have to
contribute I have a responsibility to
contribute to the
world I could have put a lot less
pressure on myself but is that is that
meaningful is that a meaningful regret
or a mistake I can't say that that's
true would the outcome have been any
different would I have worked any less
more diligently I don't
know well it's a good thing you have
because um you've really led the charge
as it relates to muscle and the
conversation around muscle and these
subjects more broadly but when I think
of someone that is at the very Forefront
of educating the world on muscle and its
importance and especially as we age that
we can be Forever Strong um at least
strong while we're still alive then that
person is you and I can't imagine how
many millions of people are better for
that I can't imagine it'd be crazy if
you could put them all in like a stadium
or something and and get to meet them
all that have just had their lives just
subtly altered even if it's just you
know one decision to go for a walk or to
do a little bit more resistance training
once a week that matters right it does
and that's a really wonderful thing and
that's I kind of guess what your your
all of your work is really aiming at is
to find understand someone but then give
them the the missing piece of
information or inspiration so that they
can pursue their very best self and I
thank you for doing the work that you do
because I I'm sure those millions of
people can't thank you themselves but
it's um it's really altering not just
their lives but also as you say the
generations that are set to come after
them and their children and so on and
that's one of the things I'm actually
thinking much more about having spoken
to you is the I've never thought because
I don't have kids yet about the role
model that I that I am or aren't to
those kids that are watching me and as
you said it I I had this s Flash back of
my mom outside my house when I was like
a four five-year-old and just watching
her run up and down the street um over
and over again in this tiny little sort
of circle that she used to do and how
that stayed with me for forever that she
cared about that and that what that
meant for us is um her
children and it's a really powerful
thing it's a really wonderful thing
because you know this isn't really about
muscle at the end of the day this is not
about much more it's not and medicine is
the gateway to really be able to provide
freedom for people that's what I want MH
muscle is the way in medicine is the way
in but what I really want for people is
I want them to have freedom and that
freedom is happiness it is yeah or
whatever it is that they want to do mhm
thank you so much it's such an honor to
meet you thank you for having
[Music]
me isn't this cool every single
conversation I have here on the D ofo at
the very end of it you'll know I asked
the guest to leave a question in the
Diary of a CEO and what we've done is we
turned every single question written in
the Diary of a CEO into these
conversation cards that you can play at
home so you've got every guest we've
ever had their question and on the back
of it if you scan that QR code you get
to watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version 2 updated conversation cards are
out right now at Theon conversation
cards.com they've sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly
[Music]
ah